DEVNOTES.md, before:

# Creating a Wordle App from Scratch

## Server with Database or Not?

- ideally we'd have a server and the answer would be hidden from the client
  - players couldn't cheat by inspecting the answer in dev tools
  - this would allow a leaderboard
  - different scores depending on the number of attempts
- Reasons I'm not going the server+auth+database route:
  - the main purpose of the project is to build something in TypeScript (which is relatively new to me)
  - this is a simple app for a portfolio project
    - I already have two paid Render servers
    - I'd have to modify an existing server to do it for free
    - it requires auth
    - it requires using a database
  - all of this adds too much work and takes focus away from using TypeScript to create something that should be relatively simple
  - if the Wordle word is randomly chosen on the frontend we can just let the user complete the puzzle and then immediately create a new game
  - if the Wordle word is chosen on the backend then we are stuck with either having no auth and have the word expire at 12:00pm and create a new word at 12:01am OR we have auth and store the current word on a per user basis in a database
    - again, this is very doable but it is time consuming

## What we'll need

- first we need the [words](https://dagshub.com/arjvik/wordle-wordlist/src/master/answerlist.txt "text file of Wordle answers on github ")
  - there are 12,947 allowed answers
  - there are about 2,309 game answers so far
  - many allowed answers are obscure:
    - words such as abrin, abris, absey, absit, abuna, abune will be accepted as valid guesses
  - I've chosen to use the 2309 words that have been used as game answers so far
    - there is a problem with the 2309 word list
      - common words are flagged as not valid answers
      - could check word frequency in some body of english text
- local storage to persist through refreshes/navigation away from the page
- state: current game answer, the current guess index, letters used, previous guesses, whether a letter has been guessed, whether a letter is in the correct position, whether a letter is in the incorrect position
- a killer name. I thought Wurdil and then googled to see if it meant anything. Wur Dil means "The Heart" in Urdu, so that's cool. Wurdil in Western Frisian means "Word." Wurdil Wedstriid - literally word game
  - based on the code I've written so far I may call it "Wurdil - Dumpster Fire Editon" :smiley:

---

## NYT Wordle: How it works

- 6 chances to guess a 5-letter word
- the Wordle play area:
  <img src="./src/assets/nyt-wordle-screen.png">

### Non-touch device

- input letters via keyboard or using the mouse with the keyboard displayed under the guesses, and they appear in the current guess boxes
- you must hit or click enter to submit your guess:
  <img src="./src/assets/wordle-guess-1.png">
- letters which are in the word:
  - but in the wrong place are yellow
  - but in the right place are green
- to submit a guess, the guess must be in the word list
- keys that are not A-Z, enter or delete are ignored
- warn on submit if not enough letters

### Hitting Enter (submitting a guess)

- if the guess is correct

  - set game to over
  - set the background color of the guess letters to green
  - set the background color of the corresponding keyboard letters to green
  - congratulate the user

- else if the guess is not a word

  - notify user, do nothing else?

- else the guess is a valid possible answer
  - if this was your final (6th) guess
    - you lost, bad luck
    - notify the user of the word
    - set the game to be over
      - the NYT surprisingly does this with a fairly plain tooltip type element
  - else this is not your final guess
    - increment guess index
    - set letter index to 0

### Coloring the letters

- todays answer is 'OFTEN'
- if we guess SOFTY
  - S and Y are dark gray on the keyboard and in the guess squares
  - F, T, and Y are yellow on the keyboard and in the guess squares
- if we guess EATER

  - E, A, and R are dark gray
  - T and E are green

- guessing SOFTY again (which you are allowed to do)

  - the T and E on the keyboard remain green because we have them in the right positions in one of our answers (EATER)
    - they don't revert to yellow based on our last answer which had no letters in the correct positions

- inline, this works:

```js
 style={{background:
 `${guesses[0][0] === answer.charAt(0) ? "green" : "white"}`,
        }}
```

- animation:

```js
.spin{
  animation:spin 2s linear;
}

@keyframes spin { 100% { transform:rotateX(360deg); } }
```

- this is better and can be adapted more easily: https://jsfiddle.net/wLLLsjLd/2/
- modded it easily:

```js
body {
    background: #ecf0f1;
}
ul {
    width: 50%;
    margin: 120px auto;
}
li {
    width: 200px;
    height: 200px;
    margin-right: 10px;
    margin-bottom: 10px;
    float: left;
    list-style: none;
    position: relative;
    cursor: pointer;
    font-family:'Open Sans';
    font-weight: 300;
    -webkit-perspective: 1000;
    -moz-perspective: 1000;
    perspective: 1000;
}
div {
    color: yellow;
    width: 100%;
    height: 100%;
    position: absolute;
    -webkit-transition: all 0.5s ease;
    -moz-transition: all 0.5s ease;
    transition: all 0.5s ease;
    -webkit-backface-visibility: hidden;
    -moz-backface-visibility: hidden;
    backface-visibility: hidden;
}
.front {
    z-index: 3;
    color: #fff;
    text-align: center;
    line-height: 210px;
    font-size: 20px;
    background: #e3e3e3;
}
li:hover > .front{
    z-index: 0;
    -webkit-transform: rotateY(180deg);
    -moz-transform: rotateY(180deg);
    transform: rotateX(180deg);
}
li:hover > .back {
    -webkit-transform: rotateX(0deg);
    -moz-transform: rotateX(0deg);
    transform: rotateX(0deg);
}
.back {
    color: #fff;
    text-align: center;
    line-height: 200px;
    font-size: 20px;
    -webkit-transform: rotateY(180deg);
    -moz-transform: rotateY(180deg);
    transform: rotateY(180deg);
    transform: rotateX(180deg);
    background: #34495e;
}
#box1 {
    background: red;
}


<ul>
    <li>
        <div class="front" id="box1">This is a div to rotate.
        </div>
        <div class="back">This is the div rotated.</div>
    </li>
</ul>

```

- on hitting enter

  - if nth letter of guess is equal to nth letter of answer
    - color is green on keyboard and in guess
  - else if nth letter of guess is included in answer
    - color is yellow
  - else color is dark gray

  answer, currentGuessIndex, guesses

  const assignLetterColor = (answer, currentGuessIndex, guesses) =>{
  const guess = guesses[currentGuessIndex];
  const answerArray = answer.split();

  for (let i = 0; i<answerArray.length, i++){
  if(guess[i] === answerArray[i])
  }

  }

### Using a function to set CSS with styled components (my own code!):

- the following should help

```js
const Shade = ({ color, shades, index }) => {
  return (
    <>
      <Wrapper index={index} color={color} shades={shades}>
        <p className="rgb">{`${shades[index].red},${shades[index].green},${shades[index].blue}`}</p>
        <p className="hex">{`#${rgbToHex(shades[index].red)}${rgbToHex(
          shades[index].green
        )}${rgbToHex(shades[index].blue)}`}</p>
      </Wrapper>
    </>
  );
};

const Wrapper = styled.div.attrs((props) => ({
  style: {
    background: `rgb(${props.shades[props.index].red},${
      props.shades[props.index].green
    },${props.shades[props.index].blue})`,
    color: findHighestContrast(
      calculateLuminance(
        props.shades[props.index].red,
        props.shades[props.index].green,
        props.shades[props.index].blue
      )
    ),
  },
}))`
  min-width: 25%;
  font-size: 0.9rem;
  display: grid;
  min-height: 30%;
  place-items: center;
  p.rgb {
    margin-top: 15%;
  }
  p.hex {
    margin-bottom: 15%;
  }
`;

export default Shade;
```

### Components

- SingleGuess
  - index
- GuessLetter
  - index
- GuessList
  - renders SingleGuess
- Keyboard
  - renders Keys
- Key

### Refactoring the key press handlers

- each key on the onscreen keyboard might trigger the key press handler
- the logic for the clicked/touched key will be the same as the logic for pressing a physical key on the keyboard
- no need to refactor!

  - can just create a new KeyboardEvent with a key prop and dispatch it on the document!
  - now that is cool

  ### Logic to color the letters (see above also)

- on hitting enter

  - if nth letter of guess is equal to nth letter of answer
    - color is green on keyboard and in guess
  - else if nth letter of guess is included in answer && keyboard key is already green
    - color is yellow in guess
    - don't change keyboard color
  - else color is dark gray

- I would asume that a letter can change from yellow to green on the keyboard but not the other way

  - this has to be correct

- keyboard key colors can only be updated when an answer is submitted
  - when enter is pressed
- the .back tile can have its color updated immediately
  - color only revealed when enter is pressed - trigger animation

### The keyboard color update

- do this first, easier to manage
- App renders Keyboard which renders Key
- every time enter is pressed (assuming conditions are met) we run a function:
  - I think we pass the background color to the Key as a prop
  - therefore, I think we need some state??
- on the other hand, each key can derive what its color should be by running some code itself - but it can only be triggered when enter is pressed && the guess is valid
- keyboard state:

```js
[{"a": "#808080"}, {"b": "#808080"}...]
```

- #808080 being the unused default color - set as a global var
- this is held in app
- each time we submit a guess (have to figure out how to determine when a guess is successfully submitted)
  - we iterate over that guesses' letters
  - if guess[0] === answer[0]
    - update keyboard to green
  - else if answer.includes(guess[0]) && keyboard.letter !== "green"
    - set keyboard letter to yellow
  - else set keyboard to dark gray - the letter is not in the answer

### Updating Tile Colors

- thought
  - allow currentGuessIndex to move to 6 (0-5 is six guesses)
  - index only incremented on a valid guess
  - execute the animation to flip the tiles when currentGuessIndex is updated

### Next Commit

### Todo

- add cypress testing

- explosion? when the game is over cause the tiles in the guesses to fly away in random directions and rotate on X and Y randomly

- Using site on my old J3 Samsung, I think that not scaling the UI down after about 650px height is probably a bad idea.
- we'll use a media query and just make everything scale down

  - supposedly the screen is 1280 x 720 but the content doesn't fit unless you scroll the URL bar out of the way and is cramped even then
  - NYT wordle looks fine on my old J3
  - the please rotate your device warning should only occur in portrait mode where the height is less than arbitrary number, say 450, otherwise we scale it down
  - the NYT version doesn't use a fixed arbitrary height
    - if device is in portrait mode then only display 'please rotate device' when the height becomes less than the width
    - if device is in landscape mode and the width is 400px or more then show 'please rotate' at 399px height
    - if device is in landscape mode and the width is less than 400px
      - show 'please rotate' when height is less than width

- add a mute button to disable sound/music for entire page

### Testing

- the elements render - DONE
- the info button makes the Information.tsx visible - DONE
- when the game is in progress we can simulate a key press or click a button and this causes a letter to appear in a tile element - DONE
- there are 5 guess tiles per guess - DONE
- there are 6 Guess components displayed on screen - DONE
- there are 30 guess tiles on screen - DONE
- there are 28 keyboard keys - DONE

  - each of the keys does what is expected

- unhappy path
  - keys 0-9 and all keys that are not A-Z or backspace or enter don't do anything - since we aren't using an input to capture what we type, we can't use .type() to test this

Commit message:

test: add steps to test inputting correct answer
After inputting correct answer, we check that game over is displayed,
close button should exist and we can click it. new game button should
exist and we click it. The guess the word prompt is displayed.

DEVNOTES.md, after:

# Creating a Wordle App from Scratch

## Server with Database or Not?

- ideally we'd have a server and the answer would be hidden from the client
  - players couldn't cheat by inspecting the answer in dev tools
  - this would allow a leaderboard
  - different scores depending on the number of attempts
- Reasons I'm not going the server+auth+database route:
  - the main purpose of the project is to build something in TypeScript (which is relatively new to me)
  - this is a simple app for a portfolio project
    - I already have two paid Render servers
    - I'd have to modify an existing server to do it for free
    - it requires auth
    - it requires using a database
  - all of this adds too much work and takes focus away from using TypeScript to create something that should be relatively simple
  - if the Wordle word is randomly chosen on the frontend we can just let the user complete the puzzle and then immediately create a new game
  - if the Wordle word is chosen on the backend then we are stuck with either having no auth and have the word expire at 12:00pm and create a new word at 12:01am OR we have auth and store the current word on a per user basis in a database
    - again, this is very doable but it is time consuming

## What we'll need

- first we need the [words](https://dagshub.com/arjvik/wordle-wordlist/src/master/answerlist.txt "text file of Wordle answers on github ")
  - there are 12,947 allowed answers
  - there are about 2,309 game answers so far
  - many allowed answers are obscure:
    - words such as abrin, abris, absey, absit, abuna, abune will be accepted as valid guesses
  - I've chosen to use the 2309 words that have been used as game answers so far
    - there is a problem with the 2309 word list
      - common words are flagged as not valid answers
      - could check word frequency in some body of english text
- local storage to persist through refreshes/navigation away from the page
- state: current game answer, the current guess index, letters used, previous guesses, whether a letter has been guessed, whether a letter is in the correct position, whether a letter is in the incorrect position
- a killer name. I thought Wurdil and then googled to see if it meant anything. Wur Dil means "The Heart" in Urdu, so that's cool. Wurdil in Western Frisian means "Word." Wurdil Wedstriid - literally word game
  - based on the code I've written so far I may call it "Wurdil - Dumpster Fire Editon" :smiley:

---

## NYT Wordle: How it works

- 6 chances to guess a 5-letter word
- the Wordle play area:
  <img src="./src/assets/nyt-wordle-screen.png">

### Non-touch device

- input letters via keyboard or using the mouse with the keyboard displayed under the guesses, and they appear in the current guess boxes
- you must hit or click enter to submit your guess:
  <img src="./src/assets/wordle-guess-1.png">
- letters which are in the word:
  - but in the wrong place are yellow
  - but in the right place are green
- to submit a guess, the guess must be in the word list
- keys that are not A-Z, enter or delete are ignored
- warn on submit if not enough letters

### Hitting Enter (submitting a guess)

- if the guess is correct

  - set game to over
  - set the background color of the guess letters to green
  - set the background color of the corresponding keyboard letters to green
  - congratulate the user

- else if the guess is not a word

  - notify user, do nothing else?

- else the guess is a valid possible answer
  - if this was your final (6th) guess
    - you lost, bad luck
    - notify the user of the word
    - set the game to be over
      - the NYT surprisingly does this with a fairly plain tooltip type element
  - else this is not your final guess
    - increment guess index
    - set letter index to 0

### Coloring the letters

- todays answer is 'OFTEN'
- if we guess SOFTY
  - S and Y are dark gray on the keyboard and in the guess squares
  - F, T, and Y are yellow on the keyboard and in the guess squares
- if we guess EATER

  - E, A, and R are dark gray
  - T and E are green

- guessing SOFTY again (which you are allowed to do)

  - the T and E on the keyboard remain green because we have them in the right positions in one of our answers (EATER)
    - they don't revert to yellow based on our last answer which had no letters in the correct positions

- inline, this works:

```js
 style={{background:
 `${guesses[0][0] === answer.charAt(0) ? "green" : "white"}`,
        }}
```

- animation:

```js
.spin{
  animation:spin 2s linear;
}

@keyframes spin { 100% { transform:rotateX(360deg); } }
```

- this is better and can be adapted more easily: https://jsfiddle.net/wLLLsjLd/2/
- modded it easily:

```js
body {
    background: #ecf0f1;
}
ul {
    width: 50%;
    margin: 120px auto;
}
li {
    width: 200px;
    height: 200px;
    margin-right: 10px;
    margin-bottom: 10px;
    float: left;
    list-style: none;
    position: relative;
    cursor: pointer;
    font-family:'Open Sans';
    font-weight: 300;
    -webkit-perspective: 1000;
    -moz-perspective: 1000;
    perspective: 1000;
}
div {
    color: yellow;
    width: 100%;
    height: 100%;
    position: absolute;
    -webkit-transition: all 0.5s ease;
    -moz-transition: all 0.5s ease;
    transition: all 0.5s ease;
    -webkit-backface-visibility: hidden;
    -moz-backface-visibility: hidden;
    backface-visibility: hidden;
}
.front {
    z-index: 3;
    color: #fff;
    text-align: center;
    line-height: 210px;
    font-size: 20px;
    background: #e3e3e3;
}
li:hover > .front{
    z-index: 0;
    -webkit-transform: rotateY(180deg);
    -moz-transform: rotateY(180deg);
    transform: rotateX(180deg);
}
li:hover > .back {
    -webkit-transform: rotateX(0deg);
    -moz-transform: rotateX(0deg);
    transform: rotateX(0deg);
}
.back {
    color: #fff;
    text-align: center;
    line-height: 200px;
    font-size: 20px;
    -webkit-transform: rotateY(180deg);
    -moz-transform: rotateY(180deg);
    transform: rotateY(180deg);
    transform: rotateX(180deg);
    background: #34495e;
}
#box1 {
    background: red;
}


<ul>
    <li>
        <div class="front" id="box1">This is a div to rotate.
        </div>
        <div class="back">This is the div rotated.</div>
    </li>
</ul>

```

- on hitting enter

  - if nth letter of guess is equal to nth letter of answer
    - color is green on keyboard and in guess
  - else if nth letter of guess is included in answer
    - color is yellow
  - else color is dark gray

  answer, currentGuessIndex, guesses

  const assignLetterColor = (answer, currentGuessIndex, guesses) =>{
  const guess = guesses[currentGuessIndex];
  const answerArray = answer.split();

  for (let i = 0; i<answerArray.length, i++){
  if(guess[i] === answerArray[i])
  }

  }

### Using a function to set CSS with styled components (my own code!):

- the following should help

```js
const Shade = ({ color, shades, index }) => {
  return (
    <>
      <Wrapper index={index} color={color} shades={shades}>
        <p className="rgb">{`${shades[index].red},${shades[index].green},${shades[index].blue}`}</p>
        <p className="hex">{`#${rgbToHex(shades[index].red)}${rgbToHex(
          shades[index].green
        )}${rgbToHex(shades[index].blue)}`}</p>
      </Wrapper>
    </>
  );
};

const Wrapper = styled.div.attrs((props) => ({
  style: {
    background: `rgb(${props.shades[props.index].red},${
      props.shades[props.index].green
    },${props.shades[props.index].blue})`,
    color: findHighestContrast(
      calculateLuminance(
        props.shades[props.index].red,
        props.shades[props.index].green,
        props.shades[props.index].blue
      )
    ),
  },
}))`
  min-width: 25%;
  font-size: 0.9rem;
  display: grid;
  min-height: 30%;
  place-items: center;
  p.rgb {
    margin-top: 15%;
  }
  p.hex {
    margin-bottom: 15%;
  }
`;

export default Shade;
```

### Components

- SingleGuess
  - index
- GuessLetter
  - index
- GuessList
  - renders SingleGuess
- Keyboard
  - renders Keys
- Key

### Refactoring the key press handlers

- each key on the onscreen keyboard might trigger the key press handler
- the logic for the clicked/touched key will be the same as the logic for pressing a physical key on the keyboard
- no need to refactor!

  - can just create a new KeyboardEvent with a key prop and dispatch it on the document!
  - now that is cool

  ### Logic to color the letters (see above also)

- on hitting enter

  - if nth letter of guess is equal to nth letter of answer
    - color is green on keyboard and in guess
  - else if nth letter of guess is included in answer && keyboard key is already green
    - color is yellow in guess
    - don't change keyboard color
  - else color is dark gray

- I would asume that a letter can change from yellow to green on the keyboard but not the other way

  - this has to be correct

- keyboard key colors can only be updated when an answer is submitted
  - when enter is pressed
- the .back tile can have its color updated immediately
  - color only revealed when enter is pressed - trigger animation

### The keyboard color update

- do this first, easier to manage
- App renders Keyboard which renders Key
- every time enter is pressed (assuming conditions are met) we run a function:
  - I think we pass the background color to the Key as a prop
  - therefore, I think we need some state??
- on the other hand, each key can derive what its color should be by running some code itself - but it can only be triggered when enter is pressed && the guess is valid
- keyboard state:

```js
[{"a": "#808080"}, {"b": "#808080"}...]
```

- #808080 being the unused default color - set as a global var
- this is held in app
- each time we submit a guess (have to figure out how to determine when a guess is successfully submitted)
  - we iterate over that guesses' letters
  - if guess[0] === answer[0]
    - update keyboard to green
  - else if answer.includes(guess[0]) && keyboard.letter !== "green"
    - set keyboard letter to yellow
  - else set keyboard to dark gray - the letter is not in the answer

### Updating Tile Colors

- thought
  - allow currentGuessIndex to move to 6 (0-5 is six guesses)
  - index only incremented on a valid guess
  - execute the animation to flip the tiles when currentGuessIndex is updated

### Next Commit

### Todo

- add cypress testing

- explosion? when the game is over cause the tiles in the guesses to fly away in random directions and rotate on X and Y randomly

- Using site on my old J3 Samsung, I think that not scaling the UI down after about 650px height is probably a bad idea.
- we'll use a media query and just make everything scale down

  - supposedly the screen is 1280 x 720 but the content doesn't fit unless you scroll the URL bar out of the way and is cramped even then
  - NYT wordle looks fine on my old J3
  - the please rotate your device warning should only occur in portrait mode where the height is less than arbitrary number, say 450, otherwise we scale it down
  - the NYT version doesn't use a fixed arbitrary height
    - if device is in portrait mode then only display 'please rotate device' when the height becomes less than the width
    - if device is in landscape mode and the width is 400px or more then show 'please rotate' at 399px height
    - if device is in landscape mode and the width is less than 400px
      - show 'please rotate' when height is less than width

- add a mute button to disable sound/music for entire page

### Testing

- the elements render - DONE
- the info button makes the Information.tsx visible - DONE
- when the game is in progress we can simulate a key press or click a button and this causes a letter to appear in a tile element - DONE
- there are 5 guess tiles per guess - DONE
- there are 6 Guess components displayed on screen - DONE
- there are 30 guess tiles on screen - DONE
- there are 28 keyboard keys - DONE
- when we submit a partial answer - DONE
  - we see a toast message stating that the answer is invalid
  - we can delete the letters we have entered
- when we submit an answer that is not a valid guess (not a word) - DONE
  - we see a toast message stating the answer is invalid
  - we can delete our incorrect values
- when we submit a valid guess that is not the answer - DONE
  - we can no longer delete the values we have entered
- when we submit 6 incorrect guesses - DONE

  - the GameOver component is displayed
  - a toast message is displayed telling us what the answer was
  - a new game and close button are visible

  - each of the keys does what is expected

- unhappy path
  - keys 0-9 and all keys that are not A-Z or backspace or enter don't do anything - since we aren't using an input to capture what we type, we can't use .type() to test this
