ISSUES.md, before:

## Purpose of This File

- when developing apps, it's common to encounter certain difficulties that have to be overcome
- this can be time consuming/frustrating
- for each project, I will record issues encountered and how to overcome

### 1 - Styled components, createGlobalStyle and Google Fonts

- fonts you set won't take effect unless you put them in `:root`, `#root`, `html`, or `*`, etc, like so:

```js
const GlobalStyle = createGlobalStyle`
:root{
font-family: "Libre Franklin", sans-serif;
  font-optical-sizing: auto;
  font-weight: 500;
  font-style: normal;

}
`;
```

- may seem obvious but when also using something like `styled-reset` you may start down the path of "`styled-reset` must be causing my fonts to not work"

### 2 Destructure props when a component is rendering another component and props are being passed

- this is so basic but for the love of god you need to:

```js
const Guess: React.FC<GuessProps> = ({ guess }) => {...}
```

- use the `{}` around the params to destructure

### 3 'styled-reset' package

- this package doesn't appear to set `box-sizing: border-box;` which is something I would use on all projects
- I had to set my `nav` to `border-box` manually

### 4 DOMException: play() request is async woes

- When the user clicks a button and makes the Information.tsx element visible, music will start to play.
- when the user closes the Information.tsx element, the music should be paused
- because play() returns a promise and we are testing with Cypress, the music may not have started playing by the time we attempt to pause() it
- I've chosen to render the audio element inside Information.tsx
  - I think this is incorrect
    - Information.tsx gets removed from the DOM when not visible
    - Your cleanup function in the useEffect attempts to call pause
    - if the play promise hasn't resolved you don't call pause BUT you
      will still get an error that the media was removed before play request could finish
- I got around this by incrementally understanding promises:

```js
useEffect(() => {
  const currentAudioRef = audioRef.current;
  let playPromise: Promise<void>;
  try {
    if (isVisible && currentAudioRef) {
      // play the audio
      playPromise = currentAudioRef.play();
    }
  } catch (error) {
    console.log(error);
  }

  return () => {
    if (
      currentAudioRef &&
      !currentAudioRef.paused &&
      playPromise !== undefined
    ) {
      currentAudioRef?.pause();
    } else {
      playPromise.catch((err) => {
        if (err.name !== "AbortError") {
          console.log(err.message);
        }
      });
    }
  };
}, [isVisible]);
```

- the ref stuff I know
- we create a playPromise and since play() returns a promise we can assign the result
- in our cleanup
  - if playPromise is not undefined that means our promise resolved, and so we can call audio.pause()
  - if playPromise is undefined then we can catch the AbortError that will
    be caused by interrupting the play() request
- now our Cypress test doesn't fall over due to an uncaught AbortError
- as per Chat Gippity we can use AbortConroller:

```js
const controller = new AbortController();
const signal = controller.signal;

// Create an audio or video element
const mediaElement = document.createElement("video");
mediaElement.src = "your_media_source_here";

// Start playback
mediaElement.play();

// To abort the play request, call the abort method on the controller
controller.abort();
```

- we could also store our controller and media in a Map:

```js
const controllers = new Map();

function abortPlay(mediaElement) {
  if (controllers.has(mediaElement)) {
    controllers.get(mediaElement).abort();
    controllers.delete(mediaElement);
  }
}

function playMedia(mediaElement) {
  const controller = new AbortController();
  controllers.set(mediaElement, controller);

  const signal = controller.signal;

  // Start playback
  mediaElement
    .play()
    .then(() => {
      // Playback completed
      controllers.delete(mediaElement);
    })
    .catch((error) => {
      // Playback aborted or encountered an error
      if (error.name === "AbortError") {
        console.log("Playback aborted.");
      } else {
        console.error("Playback error:", error);
      }
      controllers.delete(mediaElement);
    });

  // Example: Abort playback after 5 seconds
  setTimeout(() => {
    abortPlay(mediaElement);
  }, 5000);
}

// Example usage
const videoElement = document.createElement("video");
videoElement.src = "your_video_source_here";
document.body.appendChild(videoElement);

playMedia(videoElement);
```

- it's worth noting that the `signal` is never used
  - for me that says maybe this isn't a great solution but I'm not willing to go down that ChatGPT rabbithole

Commit message:

test: add test for non-alpha keys
Add test to check that all (ish) printable keyboard keys don't produce
output to the UI. Added tabindex to App to enable .type() to work where
there are no other valid elements to chain .type() from. Update ISSUES
and DEVNOTES.md files.

ISSUES.md, after:

## Purpose of This File

- when developing apps, it's common to encounter certain difficulties that have to be overcome
- this can be time consuming/frustrating
- for each project, I will record issues encountered and how to overcome

### 1 - Styled components, createGlobalStyle and Google Fonts

- fonts you set won't take effect unless you put them in `:root`, `#root`, `html`, or `*`, etc, like so:

```js
const GlobalStyle = createGlobalStyle`
:root{
font-family: "Libre Franklin", sans-serif;
  font-optical-sizing: auto;
  font-weight: 500;
  font-style: normal;

}
`;
```

- may seem obvious but when also using something like `styled-reset` you may start down the path of "`styled-reset` must be causing my fonts to not work"

### 2 Destructure props when a component is rendering another component and props are being passed

- this is so basic but for the love of god you need to:

```js
const Guess: React.FC<GuessProps> = ({ guess }) => {...}
```

- use the `{}` around the params to destructure

### 3 'styled-reset' package

- this package doesn't appear to set `box-sizing: border-box;` which is something I would use on all projects
- I had to set my `nav` to `border-box` manually

### 4 DOMException: play() request interrupted woes

- When the user clicks a button and makes the Information.tsx element visible, music will start to play.
- when the user closes the Information.tsx element, the music should be paused
- because play() returns a promise and we are testing with Cypress, the music may not have started playing by the time we attempt to pause() it
- I've chosen to render the audio element inside Information.tsx
  - I think this is incorrect
    - Information.tsx gets removed from the DOM when not visible
    - Your cleanup function in the useEffect attempts to call pause
    - if the play promise hasn't resolved you don't call pause BUT you
      will still get an error that the media was removed before play request could finish
- I got around this by incrementally understanding promises:

```js
useEffect(() => {
  const currentAudioRef = audioRef.current;
  let playPromise: Promise<void>;
  try {
    if (isVisible && currentAudioRef) {
      // play the audio
      playPromise = currentAudioRef.play();
    }
  } catch (error) {
    console.log(error);
  }

  return () => {
    if (
      currentAudioRef &&
      !currentAudioRef.paused &&
      playPromise !== undefined
    ) {
      currentAudioRef?.pause();
    } else {
      playPromise.catch((err) => {
        if (err.name !== "AbortError") {
          console.log(err.message);
        }
      });
    }
  };
}, [isVisible]);
```

- the ref stuff I know
- we create a playPromise and since play() returns a promise we can assign the result
- in our cleanup
  - if playPromise is not undefined that means our promise resolved, and so we can call audio.pause()
  - if playPromise is undefined then we can catch the AbortError that will
    be caused by interrupting the play() request
- now our Cypress test doesn't fall over due to an uncaught AbortError
- as per Chat Gippity we can use AbortConroller:

```js
const controller = new AbortController();
const signal = controller.signal;

// Create an audio or video element
const mediaElement = document.createElement("video");
mediaElement.src = "your_media_source_here";

// Start playback
mediaElement.play();

// To abort the play request, call the abort method on the controller
controller.abort();
```

- we could also store our controller and media in a Map:

```js
const controllers = new Map();

function abortPlay(mediaElement) {
  if (controllers.has(mediaElement)) {
    controllers.get(mediaElement).abort();
    controllers.delete(mediaElement);
  }
}

function playMedia(mediaElement) {
  const controller = new AbortController();
  controllers.set(mediaElement, controller);

  const signal = controller.signal;

  // Start playback
  mediaElement
    .play()
    .then(() => {
      // Playback completed
      controllers.delete(mediaElement);
    })
    .catch((error) => {
      // Playback aborted or encountered an error
      if (error.name === "AbortError") {
        console.log("Playback aborted.");
      } else {
        console.error("Playback error:", error);
      }
      controllers.delete(mediaElement);
    });

  // Example: Abort playback after 5 seconds
  setTimeout(() => {
    abortPlay(mediaElement);
  }, 5000);
}

// Example usage
const videoElement = document.createElement("video");
videoElement.src = "your_video_source_here";
document.body.appendChild(videoElement);

playMedia(videoElement);
```

- it's worth noting that the `signal` is never used
  - for me that says maybe this isn't a great solution but I'm not willing to go down that ChatGPT rabbithole

### 5 Cypress .type() won't work if you're not typing into an input (or similar element)

- the answer to this is not `cypress-real-events`
- the potential answer (it may be hacky or bad practice) is just to add a `tabindex={0}` to your App.tsx
- after this is done, .type() will work
  - you don't have to get or focus the element that has the tabindex on it
  - get an element (eg `#root`) and chain `type()` onto that and it works
